vi /tmp/test
two main operating modes: command and input
always starts in command mode
alias vi

To get into input mode, type an input command letter
then press the Esc key
a—The add command. With this command, you can input text that starts to the right of the cursor.
A—The add at end command. With this command, you can input text starting at the end of the current line.
i—The insert command. With this command, you can input text that starts to the left of the cursor.
I—The insert at beginning command. With this command, you can input text that starts at the beginning of the current line.
o—The open below command. This command opens a line below the current line and puts you in insert mode.
O—The open above command. This command opens a line above the current line and puts you in insert mode.

(:) to go into ex mode, you must press Esc twice to return to command mode.

Arrow keys—Move the cursor up, down, left, or right
W or w—Moves the cursor to the beginning of the next word
B or b—Moves the cursor to the beginning of the previous word
0 (zero)—Moves the cursor to the beginning of the current line.
$—Moves the cursor to the end of the current line.
H—Moves the cursor to the upper-left corner of the screen
M—Moves the cursor to the fi rst character of the middle line on the screen.
L—Moves the cursor to the lower-left corner of the screen

x—Deletes the character under the cursor.
X—Deletes the character directly before the cursor.
d<?>—Deletes some text.
c<?>—Changes some text.
y<?>—Yanks (copies) some text

dw—Deletes (d) a word (w) after the current cursor position.
db—Deletes (d) a word (b) before the current cursor position.
dd—Deletes (d) the entire current line (d).
c$—Changes (c) the characters (actually erases them) from the current character
to the end of the current line ($) and goes into input mode.
c0—Changes (c) (again, erases characters) from the previous character to the
beginning of the current line (0) and goes into input mode.
cl—Erases (c) the current letter (l) and goes into input mode.
cc—Erases (c) the line (c) and goes into input mode.
yy—Copies (y) the current line (y) into the buffer.
y)—Copies (y) the current sentence ( ) ), to the right of the cursor, into the buffer.
y}—Copies (y) the current paragraph ( } ), to the right of the cursor, into the buffer.

3dd—Deletes (d) three (3) lines (d), beginning at the current line.
3dw—Deletes (d) the next three (3) words (w).
5cl—Changes (c) the next fi ve (5) letters (l) (that is, removes the letters and enters input mode).
12j—Moves down (j) 12 lines (12).
5cw—Erases (c) the next fi ve (5) words (w) and goes into input mode.
4y)—Copies (y) the next four (4) sentences ( ) ).

p or P—Puts the copied text to the left of the cursor
repeat that action by typing a period (.)

ZZ—Saves the current changes to the fi le and exits from vi.
:w—Saves the current fi le but doesn't exit from vi.
:wq—Works the same as ZZ.
:q—Quits the current fi le. This works only if you don’t have any unsaved changes.
:q!—Quits the current fi le and doesn’t save the changes you just made to the fi le.

Esc—Remember that Esc gets you back to command mode.
u—Press u to undo the previous change you made.
Ctrl+R—If you decide you didn’t want to undo the previous undo command, use Ctrl+R for Redo
Caps Lock—Beware of hitting Caps Lock by mistake.
:!command—You can run a shell command while you are in vi using :! followed by a shell command name.
Ctrl+G—If you forget what you are editing, pressing these keys displays the name
of the file that you are editing and the current line that you are on at the bottom of the screen.

Ctrl+f—Pages ahead, one page at a time.
Ctrl+b—Pages back, one page at a time.
Ctrl+d—Pages ahead one-half page at a time.
Ctrl+u—Pages back one-half page at a time.
G—Goes to the last line of the fi le.
1G—Goes to the fi rst line of the fi le.
35G—Goes to any line number (35, in this case).

/ or ? search for the next or previous text
/hello—Searches forward for the word hello.
?goodbye—Searches backward for the word goodbye.
/The.*foot—Searches forward for a line that has the word The in it and also, after that at some point, the word foot.
?[pP]rint—Searches backward for either print or Print.

vimtutor - to learn more